Spectral Library Format
=======================

# Introduction

https://docs.google.com/document/d/1LgSGtR_t5IcUS9rV7YtsLveDVX9X8KsOpU-5NJ4vuYI/edit?usp=sharing

The **Spectral Library Format** is a formal [HUPO-PSI](www.psidev.info/) standard and file format to store
and distribute Spectral Libraries/Archives. The target main target audience for this format
are primarily spectral library search tools and resources such as ProteomeXchange Partners who generates the spectral libraries.
Apache 2 licensed.

## What is an Spectral Library?

Analytical chemists have long used the fragmentation pattern of an unknown analyte in the
mass spectrometer to infer structural information, but this process was
manual and time-consuming. It would also be repetitive, as the same analytes would be detected over and over again in different
experiments in different laboratories. Therefore, to take advantage
of previous identifications and automate the interpretation, it was sensible to collect such identified spectra in a “library” and use them as references for data analysis in future experiments.

The task of assigning a query spectrum to a molecular structure is simplified to finding the corresponding spectrum
generated by the same molecule, if it exists, in the reference spectral library.

Since 2006, NIST has begun to extend their library building operation to include peptides, and
data repositories such as the [Global Proteome Machine](http://gpmdb.thegpm.org), [PeptideAtlas](http://www.peptideatlas.org)
and [PRIDE Database](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive) started to compile and release spectral
libraries from the rapidly accumulating data they collected from the
community.

References:

[1] Shao, Wenguang, and Henry Lam. "Tandem mass spectral libraries of peptides and their roles in proteomics research." Mass spectrometry reviews (2016).

[2] Griss, Johannes. "Spectral library searching in proteomics." Proteomics (2016).

## What is an Spectral Archive?

Spectral Archives are clusters of similar spectra, both identified and unidentified, across
multiple datasets. Like spectral libraries, spectral archives can
be used to perform accurate spectrum similarity–based identifications. Archives also extend
libraries, making it possible to analyze peptides that would typically remain below the radar
with traditional database searches, opening new opportunities
in areas such as proteogenomics or biomarker discovery.

References:

[1] Frank, Ari M., et al. "Spectral archives: extending spectral libraries to analyze both identified and unidentified spectra." Nature methods 8.7 (2011): 587-591.

[2] Lam, Henry. "Spectral archives: a vision for future proteomics data repositories." Nature methods 8.7 (2011): 546.

[3] Griss, Johannes, et al. "Recognizing millions of consistently unidentified spectra across hundreds of shotgun proteomics datasets." Nature methods (2016).

## Why Spectral Library Format?

Over past yeas several file formats has been created to store and disseminate spectral libraries:
   - MSP
   - X!Hunter binary MGF
   - BiblioSpec SQLite
   - splib (SpectraST)

Each database provides their spectral libraries using one of these formats (For example,
PeptideAtlas (splib), PRIDE (MSP), GPMDB (X!Hunter binary MGF), NIST (MSP)). Some spectral search engines
support multiple formats, and some do not, making it difficult to share libraries and
compare spectral library searching tools. In the proteomics community, there has been
a long-standing effort to standardize raw mass spectrometric data and the results of data
analysis, primarily identification. But spectral libraries straddle the boundary between
the two and cannot be adequately served by either efforts.

As there remains much fluidity and disagreement in what information should go into a
spectral library, the format must be flexible enough to fit all the potential use cases
of spectral libraries, and yet retain sufficient structure for it to be a practically
useful standard.

## What is Spectral Library Format?

The Spectral Library Format is a HUPO-PSI format to handle and exchange spectral libraries and
archives. This **repository** contains the information about current spectral libraries formats,
the Spectral Library Format Control Vocabulary, the Spectral Library specifications, examples and
tools that export/validate and visualize those files.

